T

Title: The Blue Jar Story Book

Author: Maria Edgeworth
        Charles Lamb
        Mary Lamb
        Alicia C. Mant


Rosamond, a little girl about seven years of age, was walking with her
mother in the streets of London. As she passed along she looked in at
the windows of several shops, and saw a great variety of different sorts
of things, of which she did not know the use or even the names. She
wished to stop to look at them, but there was a great number of people
in the streets, and a great many carts, carriages, and wheelbarrows, and
she was afraid to let go her mother's hand.

'Oh, mother, how happy I should be,' she said, as she passed a toy-shop,
'if I had all these pretty things!'

'What, all! Do you wish for them all, Rosamond?'

'Yes, mother, all.'

As she spoke they came to a milliner's shop, the windows of which were
decorated with ribands and lace and festoons of artificial flowers.

'Oh mother, what beautiful roses! Won't you buy some of them?'

'No, my dear.'

'Why?'

'Because I don't want them, my dear.'

They went a little farther, and came to another shop, which caught
Rosamond's eye. It was a jeweller's shop, and in it were a great many
pretty baubles, ranged in drawers behind glass.

'Mother, will you buy some of these?'

'Which of them, Rosamond?'

'Which? I don't know which; any of them will do, for they are all
pretty.'

'Yes, they are all pretty; but of what use would they be to me?'

'Use! Oh, I'm sure you could find some use or other for them if you
would only buy them first.'

'But I would rather find out the use first.'

'Well, then, mother, there are buckles; you know that buckles are useful
things, very useful things.'

'I have a pair of buckles; I don't want another pair,' said her mother,
and walked on. Rosamond was very sorry that her mother wanted nothing.
Presently, however, they came to a shop which appeared to her far more
beautiful than the rest. It was a chemist's shop, but she did not know
that.

'Oh, mother, oh!' cried she, pulling her mother's hand, 'look,
look!--blue, green, red, yellow, and purple! Oh, mother, what beautiful
things! Won't you buy some of these?'

Still her mother answered as before: 'Of what use would they be to me,
Rosamond?'

'You might put flowers in them, mother, and they would look so pretty on
the chimney-piece. I wish I had one of them.'

'You have a flower-pot,' said her mother, 'and that is not a
flower-pot.'

'But I could use it for a flower-pot, mother, you know.'

'Perhaps, if you were to see it nearer, if you were to examine it, you
might be disappointed.'

'No, indeed, I'm sure I should not; I should like it exceedingly.'

Rosamond kept her head turned to look at the blue vase till she could
see it no longer.

'Then, mother,' said she, after a pause, 'perhaps you have no money.'

'Yes, I have.'

'Dear me! if I had money I would buy roses, and boxes, and buckles, and
blue flower-pots, and everything.' Rosamond was obliged to pause in the
midst of her speech. 'Oh, mother, would you stop a minute for me? I have
got a stone in my shoe; it hurts me very much.'

'How comes there to be a stone in your shoe?'

'Because of this great hole, mother; it comes in there. My shoes are
quite worn out. I wish you would be so very good as to give me another
pair.'

'Nay, Rosamond, but I have not money enough to buy shoes, and
flower-pots, and buckles, and boxes, and everything.'

Rosamond thought that was a great pity. But now her foot, which had been
hurt by the stone, began to give her so much pain that she was obliged
to hop every other step, and she could think of nothing else. They came
to a shoemaker's shop soon afterwards.

'There, there, mother, there are shoes; there are little shoes that
would just fit me, and you know shoes would be really of use to me.'

'Yes, so they would, Rosamond. Come in.' She followed her mother into
the shop.

Mr. Sole, the shoemaker, had a great many customers, and his shop was
full, so they were obliged to wait.

'Well, Rosamond,' said her mother, 'you don't think this shop so pretty
as the rest?'

'No, not nearly; it is black and dark, and there are nothing but shoes
all round, and, besides, there's a very disagreeable smell.'

'That smell is the smell of new leather.'

'Is, it? Oh,' said Rosamond looking round 'there is a pair of little
shoes; they'll just fit me, I'm sure.'

'Perhaps they might, but you cannot be sure till you have tried them on,
any more than you can be quite sure that you should like the blue vase
_exceedingly_ till you have examined it more attentively.'

'Why, I don't know about the shoes, certainly, till I have tried; but,
mother, I am quite sure that I should like the flower-pot.'

'Well, which would you rather have--that jar or a pair of shoes? I will
buy either for you.'

'Dear mother, thank you! but if you could buy both?'

'No, not both.'

'Then the jar, if you please.'

'But I should tell you, that in that case I shall not give you another
pair of shoes this month.'

'This month! that's a very long time indeed! You can't think how these
hurt me. I believe I'd better have the new shoes. Yet, that blue
flower-pot. Oh, indeed, mother, these shoes are not so very very bad! I
think I might wear them a little longer, and the month will soon be
over. I can make them last till the end of the month, can't I? Don't you
think so, mother?'

'Nay, my dear, I want you to think for yourself; you will have time
enough to consider the matter whilst I speak to Mr. Sole about my
clogs.'

Mr. Sole was by this time at leisure, and whilst her mother was speaking
to him Rosamond stood in profound meditation, with one shoe on and the
other in her hand.

'Well, my dear, have you decided?'

'Mother! yes, I believe I have. If you please, I should like to have the
flower-pot; that is, if you won't think me very silly, mother.'

'Why, as to that, I can't promise you, Rosamond; but, when you have to
judge for yourself, you should choose what will make you happy, and then
it would not signify who thought you silly.'

'Then, mother, if that's all, I'm sure the flower-pot would make me
happy,' said she, putting on her old shoe again; 'so I choose the
flower-pot.'

'Very well, you shall have it. Clasp your shoe, and come home.'

Rosamond clasped her shoe and ran after her mother. It was not long
before the shoe came down at the heel, and many times she was obliged to
stop to take the stones out of it, and she often limped with pain; but
still the thoughts of the blue flower-pot prevailed, and she persisted
in her choice.

When they came to the shop with the large window Rosamond felt much
pleasure upon hearing her mother desire the servant who was with them to
buy the blue jar, and bring it home. He had other commissions, so he did
not return with them. Rosamond as soon as she got in ran to gather all
her own flowers, which she kept in a corner of her mother's garden.

'I am afraid they'll be dead before the flower-pot comes, Rosamond,'
said her mother to her, as she came in with the flowers in her lap.

'No, indeed, mother; it will come home very soon, I dare say. I shall be
very happy putting them into the blue flower-pot.'

'I hope so, my dear.'

The servant was much longer returning home than Rosamond had expected;
but at length he came, and brought with him the long-wished-for jar. The
moment it was set down upon the table, Rosamond ran up to it with an
exclamation of joy. 'I may have it now, mother?'

'Yes, my dear! it is yours.'

Rosamond poured the flowers from her lap upon the carpet, and seized the
blue flower-pot.

'Oh, dear mother,' cried she, as soon as she had taken off the top, 'but
there's something dark in it which smells very disagreeably. What is it?
I didn't want this black stuff.'

'Nor I, my dear.'

'But what shall I do with it, mother?'

'That I cannot tell.'

'It will be of no use to me, mother.'

'That I cannot help.'

'But I must pour it out, and fill the flower-pot with water.'

'As you please, my dear.'

'Will you lend me a bowl to pour it into, mother?'

'That was more than I promised you, my dear, but I will lend you a
bowl.'

The bowl was produced, and Rosamond proceeded to empty the blue vase.
But she experienced much surprise and disappointment on finding, when it
was entirely empty, that it was no longer a _blue_ vase. It was a plain
white glass jar, which had appeared to have that beautiful colour
merely from the liquor with which it had been filled.

Little Rosamond burst into tears.

'Why should you cry, my dear?' said her mother; 'it will be of as much
use to you now as ever for a flower-pot.'

'But it won't look so pretty on the chimney-piece. I am sure, if I had
known that it was not really blue, I should not have wished to have it
so much.'

'But didn't I tell you that you had not examined it, and that perhaps
you would be disappointed?'

'And so I am disappointed, indeed. I wish I had believed you at once.
Now I had much rather have the shoes, for I shall not be able to walk
all this month; even walking home that little way hurt me exceedingly.
Mother, I will give you the flower-pot back again, and that blue stuff
and all, if you'll only give me the shoes.'

'No, Rosamond; you must abide by your own choice, and now the best thing
you can possibly do is to bear your disappointment with good humour.'

'I will bear it as well as I can,' said Rosamond, wiping her eyes; and
she began slowly and sorrowfully to fill the vase with flowers.

But Rosamond's disappointment did not end here. Many were the
difficulties and distresses into which her imprudent choice brought her
before the end of the month. Every day her shoes grew worse and worse,
till at last she could neither run, dance, jump, nor walk in them.
Whenever Rosamond was called to see anything, she was detained pulling
her shoes up at the heels, and was sure to be too late. Whenever her
mother was going out to walk, she could not take Rosamond with her, for
Rosamond had no soles to her shoes; and at length, on the very last day
of the month, it happened that her father proposed to take her, with her
brother, to a glasshouse which she had long wished to see. She was very
happy; but when she was quite ready, had her hat and gloves on, and was
making haste downstairs to her brother and father, who were waiting for
her at the hall-door, the shoe dropped off. She put it on again in a
great hurry, but as she was going across the hall her father turned
round. 'Why are you walking slipshod? no one must walk slipshod with me.
Why, Rosamond,' said he, looking at her shoes with disgust, 'I thought
that you were always neat. Go; I cannot take you with me.'

Rosamond coloured and retired. 'Oh, mother,' said she, as she took off
her hat, 'how I wish that I had chosen the shoes! They would have been
of so much more use to me than that jar. However, I am sure--no, not
quite sure, but I hope I shall be wiser another time.'




  _THE BASKET-WOMAN_

  MARIA EDGEWORTH.


At the foot of a steep, slippery, white hill, near Dunstable, in
Bedfordshire, called Chalk Hill, there is a hut, or rather a hovel,
which travellers would scarcely suppose could be inhabited, if they did
not see the smoke rising from its peaked roof. An old woman lived in
this hovel, many years ago, and with her a little boy and girl, the
children of a beggar who died and left these orphans perishing with
hunger. They thought themselves very happy when the good old woman first
took them into her hut, and bid them warm themselves at her small fire,
and gave them a crust of mouldy bread to eat. She had not much to give,
but what she had she gave with goodwill. She was very kind to these poor
children, and worked hard at her spinning-wheel and at her knitting to
support herself and them. She earned money also in another way. She used
to follow all the carriages as they went up Chalk Hill, and when the
horses stopped to take breath or to rest themselves, she put stones
behind the carriage-wheels to prevent them from rolling backwards down
the steep, slippery hill.

The little boy and girl loved to stand beside the good-natured old
woman's spinning wheel when she was spinning, and to talk to her. At
these times she taught them something, which she said she hoped they
would remember all their lives. She explained to them what is meant by
telling the truth, and what it is to be honest. She taught them to
dislike idleness, and to wish that they could be useful.

One evening, as they were standing beside her, the little boy said to
her: 'Grandmother'--for that was the name by which she liked that these
children should call her--'grandmother, how often you are forced to get
up from your spinning-wheel, and to follow the chaises and coaches up
that steep hill, to put stones underneath the wheels to hinder them from
rolling back! The people who are in the carriages give you a halfpenny
or a penny for doing so, don't they?'

'Yes, child.'

'But it is very hard work for you to go up and down that hill. You often
say that you are tired. And then you know that you cannot spin all that
time. Now, if we might go up the hill, and put the stones behind the
wheels, you could sit still at your work; and would not the people give
us the halfpence? and could not we bring them all to you? Do, pray, dear
grandmother, try us for one day--to-morrow will you?'

'Yes,' said the old woman, 'I will try what you can do; but I must go up
the hill along with you for the first two or three times, for fear you
should get yourselves hurt.'

So the next day the little boy and girl went with their grandmother, as
they used to call her, up the steep hill, and she showed the boy how to
prevent the wheels from rolling back by putting stones behind them, and
she said: 'This is called scotching the wheels,' and she took off the
boy's hat and gave it to the little girl to hold up to the
carriage-windows ready for the halfpence.

When she thought that the children knew how to manage by themselves she
left them and returned to her spinning-wheel. A great many carriages
happened to go by this day, and the little girl received a great many
halfpence. She carried them all in her brother's hat to her grandmother
in the evening, and the old woman smiled and thanked the children. She
said that they had been useful to her, and that her spinning had gone on
finely, because she had been able to sit still at her wheel all day.

'But, Paul, my boy,' said she, 'what is the matter with your hand?'

'Only a pinch--only one pinch that I got as I was putting a stone behind
a wheel of a chaise. It does not hurt me much, grandmother, and I've
thought of a good thing for to-morrow. I shall never be hurt again if
you will only be so good as to give me the old handle of the broken
crutch, grandmother, and the block of wood that lies in the
chimney-corner, and that is of no use. I'll make it of some use, if I
may have it.'

'Take it, then, dear,' said the old woman, 'and you'll find the handle
of the broken crutch under my bed.'

Paul went to work immediately, and fastened one end of the pole into the
block of wood, so as to make something like a dry-rubbing brush.

'Look, grandmother--look at my _scotcher_! I call this thing my
_scotcher_,' said Paul, 'because I shall always scotch the wheels with
it. I shall never pinch my fingers again; my hands, you see, will be
safe at the end of this long stick. And, Sister Anne, you need not be at
the trouble of carrying any more stones after me up the hill; we shall
never want stones any more. My scotcher will do without anything else, I
hope. I wish it was morning, and that a carriage would come, that I
might run up the hill and try my scotcher.'

[Illustration: "Look, grandmother--look at my scotcher!"]

'And I wish that as many chaises may go by to-morrow as there did
to-day, and that we may bring you as many halfpence, too, grandmother,'
said the little girl.

'So do I, my dear Anne,' said the old woman, 'for I mean that you and
your brother shall have all the money that you get to-morrow. You may
buy some ginger bread for yourselves, or some of those ripe plums that
you saw at the fruit-stall the other day, which is just going into
Dunstable. I told you then that I could not afford to buy such things
for you, but now that you can earn halfpence for yourselves, children,
it is fair you should taste a ripe plum and bit of gingerbread for once
and a way in your lives.'

'We'll bring some of the gingerbread home to her, shan't we, brother?'
whispered little Anne.

The morning came, but no carriages were heard though Paul and his sister
had risen at five o'clock that they might be sure to be ready for early
travellers. Paul kept his scotcher poised upon his shoulder, and watched
eagerly at his station at the bottom of the hill. He did not wait long
before a carriage came. He followed it up the hill, and the instant the
postillion called to him and bade him stop the wheels, he put his
scotcher behind them, and found that it answered the purpose perfectly
well.

Many carriages went by this day, and Paul and Anne received a great many
halfpence from the travellers.

When it grew dusk in the evening Anne said to her brother: 'I don't
think any more carriages will come by to-day. Let us count the
halfpence, and carry them home now to grandmother.'

'No, not yet,' answered Paul; 'let them alone--let them lie still in the
hole where I have put them. I dare say more carriages will come by
before it is quite dark, and then we shall have more halfpence.'

Paul had taken the halfpence out of his hat, and he had put them into a
hole in the high bank by the roadside, and Anne said she would not
meddle with them, and that she would wait till her brother liked to
count them; and Paul said: 'If you will stay and watch here, I will go
and gather some blackberries for you in the hedge in yonder field. Stand
you hereabouts, half-way up the hill, and the moment you see any
carriage coming along the road run as fast as you can and call me.'

Anne waited a long time, or what she thought a long time, and she saw no
carriage and she trailed her brother's scotcher up and down till she was
tired. Then she stood still and looked again, and she saw no carriage,
so she went sorrowfully into the field and to the hedge where her
brother was gathering blackberries, and she said:

'Paul, I'm sadly tired--_sadly tired!_' said she, 'and my eyes are quite
strained with looking for chaises. No more chaises will come to-night,
and your scotcher is lying there, of no use, upon the ground. Have not I
waited long enough for to-day, Paul?'

'Oh no,' said Paul. 'Here are some blackberries for you; you had better
wait a little bit longer. Perhaps a carriage might go by whilst you are
standing here talking to me.'

Anne, who was of a very obliging temper, and who liked to do what she
was asked to do, went back to the place where the scotcher lay, and
scarcely had she reached the spot when she heard the noise of a
carriage. She ran to call her brother, and, to their great joy, they now
saw four chaises coming towards them. Paul, as soon as they went up the
hill, followed with his scotcher. First he scotched the wheels of one
carriage, then of another; and Anne was so much delighted with observing
how well the scotcher stopped the wheels, and how much better it was
than stones, that she forgot to go and hold her brother's hat to the
travellers for halfpence, till she was roused by the voice of a little
rosy girl who was looking out of the window of one of the chaises. 'Come
close to the chaise-door,' said the little girl; 'here are some
halfpence for you.'

Anne held the hat, and she afterwards went on to the other carriages.
Money was thrown to her from each of them, and when they had all gotten
safely to the top of the hill, she and her brother sat down upon a large
stone by the roadside to count their treasure. First they began by
counting what was in the hat--'One, two, three, four halfpence.'

'But, oh, brother, look at this!' exclaimed Anne; 'this is not the same
as the other halfpence.'

'No, indeed, it is not,' cried Paul; 'it is no halfpenny. It is a
guinea--a bright golden guinea!'

'Is it?' said Anne, who had never seen a guinea in her life before, and
who did not know its value, 'and will it do as well as a halfpenny to
buy gingerbread? I'll run to the fruit-stall and ask the woman, shall
I?'

'No, no,' said Paul, 'you need not ask any woman, or anybody but me. I
can tell you all about it as well as anybody in the whole world.'

'The whole world! Oh, Paul, you forgot. Not so well as my grandmother.'

'Why, not so well as my grandmother, perhaps; but, Anne, I can tell you
that you must not talk yourself, Anne, but you must listen to me
quietly, or else you won't understand what I am going to tell you; for I
can assure you that I don't think I quite understood it myself, Anne,
the first time my grandmother told it to me, though I stood stock-still
listening my best.'

Prepared by this speech to hear something very difficult to be
understood, Anne looked very grave, and her brother explained to her
that with a guinea she might buy two hundred and fifty-two times as many
plums as she could get for a penny.

'Why, Paul, you know the fruit-woman said she would give us a dozen
plums for a penny. Now, for this little guinea would she give us two
hundred and fifty-two dozen?'

'If she has so many, and if we like to have so many, to be sure she
will,' said Paul; 'but I think we should not like to have two hundred
and fifty-two dozen of plums; we could not eat such a number.'

'But we could give some of them to my grandmother,' said Anne.

'But still there would be too many for her, and for us, too,' said Paul,
'and when we had eaten the plums there would be an end to all the
pleasure. But now I'll tell you what I am thinking of, Anne, that we
might buy something for my grandmother that would be very useful to her
indeed with the guinea--something that would last a great while.'

[Illustration: "We might buy something very useful with the guinea."]

'What, brother? What sort of thing?'

'Something that she said she wanted very much last winter, when she was
so ill with the rheumatism--something that she said yesterday, when you
were making her bed, she wished she might be able to buy before next
winter.'

'I know, I know what you mean!' said Anne--'a blanket. Oh, yes, Paul,
that will be much better than plums; do let us buy a blanket for her.
How glad she will be to see it! I will make her bed with the new
blanket, and then bring her to look at it. But, Paul, how shall we buy a
blanket? Where are blankets to be got?'

'Leave that to me; I'll manage that. I know where blankets can be got; I
saw one hanging out of a shop the day I went last to Dunstable.'

'You have seen a great many things at Dunstable, brother.'

'Yes, a great many; but I never saw anything there or anywhere else that
I wished for half so much as I did for the blanket for my grandmother.
Do you remember how she used to shiver with the cold last winter? I'll
buy the blanket to-morrow. I'm going to Dunstable with her spinning.'

'And you'll bring the blanket to me, and I shall make the bed very
neatly. That will be all right--all happy!' said Anne, clapping her
hands.

'But stay! Hush! don't clap your hands so, Anne. It will not be all
happy, I'm afraid,' said Paul, and his countenance changed, and he
looked very grave. 'It will not be all right, I'm afraid, for there's
one thing we have neither of us thought of, but that we ought to think
about. We cannot buy the blanket, I'm afraid.'

'Why--Paul, why?'

'Because I don't think this guinea is honestly ours.'

'Nay, brother, but I'm sure it is honestly ours. It was given to us, and
grandmother said all that was given to us to-day was to be our own.'

'But who gave it to you, Anne?'

'Some of the people in those chaises, Paul. I don't know which of them,
but I dare say it was the little rosy girl.'

'No,' said Paul, 'for when she called you to the chaise door she said,
"Here's some halfpence for you." Now, if she gave you the guinea, she
must have given it to you by mistake.'

'Well, but perhaps some of the people in the other chaises gave it to
me, and did not give it to me by mistake, Paul. There was a gentleman
reading in one of the chaises, and a lady, who looked very
good-naturedly at me, and then the gentleman put down his book, and put
his head out of the window and looked at your scotcher, brother, and he
asked me if that was your own making; and when I said yes, and that I
was your sister, he smiled at me, and put his hand into his waistcoat
pocket, and threw a handful of halfpence into the hat, and I dare say he
gave us the guinea along with them because he liked your scotcher so
much.'

'Why,' said Paul, 'that might be, to be sure, but I wish I was quite
certain of it.'

'Then, as we are not quite certain, had not we best go and ask my
grandmother what she thinks about it?'

Paul thought this was excellent advice, and he was not a silly boy who
did not like to follow good advice. He went with his sister directly to
his grandmother, showed her the guinea and told her how they came by it.

'My dear honest children,' said she, 'I am very glad you told me all
this. I am very glad that you did not buy either the plums or the
blanket with this guinea. I'm sure it is not honestly ours. Those who
threw it you gave it you by mistake, I warrant, and what I would have
you do is to go to Dunstable, and try if you can at either of the inns
find out the person who gave it to you. It is now so late in the evening
that perhaps the travellers will sleep at Dunstable instead of going on
the next stage; and it is likely that whosoever gave you a guinea
instead of a halfpenny has found out their mistake by this time. All you
can do is to go and inquire for the gentleman who was reading in the
chaise.'

'Oh!' interrupted Paul, 'I know a good way of finding him out. I
remember it was a dark-green chaise with red wheels, and I remember I
read the innkeeper's name upon the chaise, "John Nelson." (I am much
obliged to you for teaching me to read, grandmother.) You told me
yesterday, grandmother, that the names written upon chaises are the
innkeepers to whom they belong. I read the name of the innkeeper upon
that chaise. It was John Nelson. So Anne and I will go to both the inns
in Dunstable, and try to find out this chaise--John Nelson's. Come,
Anne, let us set out before it gets quite dark.'

Anne and her brother passed with great courage the tempting stall that
was covered with gingerbread and ripe plums, and pursued their way
steadily through the streets of Dunstable; but Paul, when he came to the
shop where he had seen the blanket, stopped for a moment, and said: 'It
is a great pity, Anne, that the guinea is not ours. However, we are
doing what is honest, and that is a comfort. Here, we must go through
this gateway into the inn-yard; we are come to the Dun Cow.'

'Cow!' said Anne, 'I see no cow.'

'Look up, and you'll see the cow over your head,' said Paul--'the sign,
the picture. Come, never mind looking at it now; I want to find out the
green chaise that has John Nelson's name upon it.'

Paul pushed forward through a crowded passage till he got into the
inn-yard. There was a great noise and bustle. The ostlers were carrying
in luggage; the postillions were rubbing down the horses, or rolling the
chaises into the coach-house.

'What now? What business have you here, pray?' said a waiter, who almost
ran over Paul as he was crossing the yard in a great hurry to get some
empty bottles from the bottle-rack. 'You've no business here, crowding
up the yard. Walk off, young gentleman, if you please.'

'Pray give me leave, sir,' said Paul, 'to stay a few minutes to look
amongst these chaises for one dark-green chaise with red wheels that has
Mr. John Nelson's name written upon it.'

'What's that he says about a dark-green chaise?' said one of the
postillions.

'What should such a one as he is know about chaises?' interrupted the
hasty waiter, and he was going to turn Paul out of the yard; but the
ostler caught hold of his arm, and said: 'Maybe the child _has_ some
business here; let's know what he has to say for himself.'

The waiter was at this instant luckily obliged to leave them to attend
the bell, and Paul told his business to the ostler, who as soon as he
saw the guinea and heard the story shook Paul by the hand, and said:
'Stand steady, my honest lad. I'll find the chaise for you, if it is to
be found here; but John Nelson's chaises almost always drive to the
Black Bull.'

After some difficulty the green chaise with John Nelson's name upon it,
and the postillion who drove that chaise, were found, and the postillion
told Paul that he was just going into the parlour to the gentleman he
had driven to be paid, and that he would carry the guinea with him.

'No,' said Paul; 'we should like to give it back ourselves.'

'Yes,' said the ostler, 'that they have a right to do.'

The postillion made no reply, but looked vexed, and went on towards the
house, desiring the children would wait in the passage till his return.
In the passage there was standing a decent, clean, good-natured looking
woman with two huge straw baskets on each side of her. One of the
baskets stood a little in the way of the entrance. A man who was pushing
his way in, and carried in his hand a string of dead larks hung to a
pole, impatient at being stopped, kicked down the straw basket, and all
its contents were thrown out. Bright straw hats, and boxes, and
slippers, were all thrown in disorder upon the dirty ground.

'Oh, they will be trampled upon! They will all be spoiled!' exclaimed
the woman to whom they belonged.

'We'll help you to pick them up, if you will let us,' cried Paul and
Anne, and they immediately ran to her assistance.

When the things were all safe in the basket again the children expressed
a desire to know how such beautiful things could be made of straw, but
the woman had not time to answer before the postillion came out of the
parlour, and with him a gentleman's servant, who came to Paul, and
clapping him upon the back, said:

'So, my little chap, I gave you a guinea for a halfpenny, I hear, and I
understand you've brought it back again; that's right, give me hold of
it.'

'No, brother,' said Anne, 'this is not the gentleman that was reading.'

'Pooh, child! I came in Mr. Nelson's green chaise. Here's the postillion
can tell you so. I and my master came in that chaise. I and my master
that was reading, as you say, and it was he that threw the money out to
you. He is going to bed; he is tired, and can't see you himself. He
desires that you'll give me the guinea.'

Paul was too honest himself to suspect that this man was telling him a
falsehood, and he now readily produced his bright guinea, and delivered
it into the servant's hands.

'Here's a sixpence apiece for you, children,' said he, 'and good-night
to you.' He pushed them towards the door, but the basket-woman whispered
to them as they went out: 'Wait in the street till I come to you.'

'Pray, Mrs. Landlady,' cried this gentleman's servant, addressing
himself to the landlady, who just then came out of a room where some
company at supper--'pray, Mrs. Landlady, please to let me have roasted
larks for my supper. You are famous for larks at Dunstable, and I make
it a rule to taste the best of everything wherever I go; and, waiter,
let me have a bottle of claret. Do you hear?'

'Larks and claret for his supper,' said the basket-woman to herself as
she looked at him from head to foot. The postillion was still waiting,
as if to speak to him, and she observed them afterwards whispering and
laughing together. '_No bad hit_,' was a sentence which the servant
pronounced several times.

Now, it occurred to the basket-woman that this man had cheated the
children out of the guinea to pay for the larks and claret, and she
thought that perhaps she could discover the truth. She waited quietly in
the passage.

'Waiter! Joe! Joe!' cried the landlady, 'why don't you carry in the
sweetmeat-puffs and the tarts here to the company in the best parlour?'

'Coming, ma'am,' answered the waiter, and with a large dish of tarts and
puffs he came from the bar. The landlady threw open the door of the best
parlour to let him in, and the basket-woman had now a full view of a
large cheerful company, and amongst them several children, sitting round
a supper-table.

'Ay,' whispered the landlady, as the door closed after the waiter and
the tarts, 'there are customers enough, I warrant, for you in that room,
if you had but the luck to be called in. Pray, what would you have the
conscience, I wonder now, to charge me for these here half-dozen little
mats to put under my dishes?'

'A trifle, ma'am,' said the basket-woman. She let the landlady have the
mats cheap, and the landlady then declared she would step in and see if
the company in the best parlour had done supper. 'When they come to
their wine,' added she, 'I'll speak a good word for you, and get you
called in afore the children are sent to bed.'

The landlady, after the usual speech of '_I hope the supper and
everything is to your liking, ladies and gentlemen_,' began with: 'If
any of the young gentlemen or ladies would have a _cur'osity_ to see any
of our famous Dunstable straw-work there's a decent body without would,
I dare say, be proud to show them her pincushion-boxes, and her baskets
and slippers, and her other _cur'osities_.'

The eyes of the children all turned towards their mother; their mother
smiled, and immediately their father called in the basket-woman, and
desired her to produce her _curiosities_. The children gathered round
her large pannier as it opened, but they did not touch any of her
things.

'Ah, papa,' cried a little rosy girl, 'here are a pair of straw slippers
that would just fit you, I think; but would not straw shoes wear out
very soon, and would not they let in the wet?'

'Yes, my dear,' said her father, 'but these slippers are meant--'

'
'But I can be certain whether the guinea you returned be mine or no,'
said the gentleman. 'I marked the guinea; it was a light one, the only
guinea I had, which I put into my waistcoat pocket this morning.' He
rang the bell, and desired the waiter to let the gentleman who was in
the room opposite to him know that he wished to see him.

'The gentleman in the white parlour, sir, do you mean?'

'I mean the master of the servant who received a guinea from this
child.'

'He is a Mr. Pembroke, sir,' said the waiter.

Mr. Pembroke came, and as soon as he heard what had happened he desired
the waiter to show him to the room where his servant was at supper. The
dishonest servant who was supping upon larks and claret, knew nothing of
what was going on; but his knife and fork dropped from his hand, and he
overturned a bumper of claret as he started up from the table in great
surprise and terror, when his master came in with a face of indignation,
and demanded, '_The guinea--the guinea, sir_, that you got from this
child! that guinea which you said I ordered you to ask for from this
child!'



mother and the sisters of this excellent young man I have found the most
valuable friends I possess on this side the great ocean. They received
me from the captain as the little protége of Atkinson, and from them I
have learned passages of his former life, and this in particular--that
the illness of which he died was brought on by a wound of which he never
quite recovered which he got in the desperate attempt, when he was
quite a boy, to defend his captain against a superior force of the enemy
which had boarded him, and which, by his premature valour, inspiriting
the men, they finally succeeded in repulsing. This was that Atkinson
who, from his pale and feminine appearance, was called Betsy. This was
he whose womanly care of me got him the name of a woman, who, with more
than female attention, condescended to play the handmaid to a little
unaccompanied orphan that fortune had cast upon the care of a rough
sea-captain and his rougher crew.



'You are a humane little fellow. Elizabeth, we might have thought of
this.'

Very kind words were now spoken to me by Sir Edward, and he called me
Harriet, precious name now grown to me. Lady Harriet kissed me, and said
she would never forget how long she had loved me as her child. These
were comfortable words, but I heard echoed round the room:

'Poor thing! _she_ cannot help it! I am sure _she_ is to be pitied! Dear
Lady Harriet, how kind, how considerate you are!'

Ah! what a deep sense of my altered condition did I then feel!

'Let the young ladies divert themselves in another room,' said Sir
Edward; 'and Harriet, take your new sister with you, and help her to
entertain your friends.'

Yes, he called me Harriet again, and afterwards invented new names for
his daughter and me, and always called us by them, apparently in jest;
yet I knew it was only because he would not hurt me with hearing our
names reversed. When Sir Edward desired us to show the children into
another room, Ann and I walked towards the door. A new sense of
humiliation arose. How could I go out at the door before Miss Lesley? I
stood irresolute. She drew back. The elder brother of my friend Augustus
assisted me in this perplexity. Pushing us all forward, as if in a
playful mood, he drove us indiscriminately before him, saying:

'I will make one among you to-day.'

He had never joined in our sports before.

My luckless play, that sad instance of my duplicity, was never once
mentioned to me afterwards, not even by any one of the children who had
acted in it, and I must also tell you how considerate an old lady was at
the time about our dresses. As soon as she perceived things growing very
serious, she hastily stripped off the upper garments we wore to
represent our different characters. I think I should have died with
shame if the child had led me into the drawing-room in the mummery I had
worn to represent a nurse. This good lady was of another essential
service to me, for, perceiving an irresolution in everyone how they
should behave to us, which distressed me very much, she contrived to
place Miss Lesley above me at table, and called her Miss Lesley, and me
Miss Withers, saying at the same time in a low voice, but as if she
meant I should hear her,

'It is better these things should be done at once, then they are over.'

My heart thanked her, for I felt the truth of what she said.

My poor mother continued very ill for many weeks. No medicine could
remove the extreme dejection of spirits she laboured under. Sir Edward
sent for Dr. Wheelding, the clergyman of the parish, to give her
religious consolation. Every day he came to visit her, and he would
always take Miss Lesley and me into the room with him.

My heart was softened by my own misfortunes, and the sight of my
penitent, suffering mother. I felt that she was now my only parent. I
strove, earnestly strove, to love her; yet ever when I looked in her
face, she would seem to me to be the very identical person whom I should
have once thought sufficiently honoured by a slight inclination of the
head, and a civil, 'How do you do, Mrs Withers?' One day, as Miss Lesley
was hanging over her with her accustomed fondness, Dr. Wheelding reading
in a Prayer-Book, and, as I thought, not at that moment regarding us, I
threw myself on my knees, and silently prayed that I, too, might be able
to love my mother.

Dr. Wheelding had been observing me. He took me into the garden, and
drew from me the subject of my petition.

'Your prayers, my good young lady,' said he, 'I hope, are heard. Sure I
am they have caused me to adopt a resolution which, as it will enable
you to see your mother frequently, will, I hope, greatly assist your
pious wishes. I will take your mother home with me to superintend my
family. Under my roof doubtless Sir Edward will often permit you to see
her. Perform your duty towards her as well as you possibly can.
Affection is the growth of time. With such good wishes in your young
heart, do not despair that in due time it will assuredly spring up.'

With the approbation of Sir Edward and Lady Harriet, my mother was
removed in a few days to Dr. Wheelding's house. There she soon
recovered! there she at present resides. She tells me she loves me
almost as well as she did when I was a baby, and we both wept at parting
when I went to school.

[Illustration]




  _Hammond's nearest and most intimate neighbours, her father ordered
Sophy, as a still further punishment, to be locked up in her own room
till the Sunday following. This was on Friday, and Sophy had two days of
solitude and imprisonment before her. The first day she passed very
dismally, but yet not unprofitably, for she felt truly ashamed and sorry
for her fault, and made many good resolutions of endeavouring to cure
herself of her mischievous propensity. The second day she began to be
somewhat more composed, and by degrees she was able to amuse herself
with watching the people in the street, which was overlooked by the
windows of her apartment, and she began, almost unconsciously to
herself, to indulge in her old habit of trying to find out what
everybody was doing, and in guessing where they were going.

She had not long been engaged in watching her neighbours before her
curiosity was excited by the appearance of a servant on horseback, who
rode up to the door, and, after giving a little three-cornered note to
Dr. Hammond's footman, rode off. The servant she knew to be Mrs.
Arden's, an intimate friend of her father, and the note she conjectured
was an invitation to dinner, and the guessing what day the invitation
was for, and who were to be the company, and whether she was included in
the invitation, was occupying her busy fancy, when she saw her sister
going out of the house with the three-cornered note in her hand, and
cross the street to Mr. McNeal's stocking shop, which was opposite.
Almost immediately afterwards Mr. McNeal's shopman came out of the shop,
and, running down the street, was presently out of sight, but soon
returned with Mr. McNeal himself. She saw Louisa reading the note to Mr.
McNeal, and in a few minutes afterwards returned home. Here was matter
of wonder and conjecture. Sophy forgot all her good resolutions, and
absolutely wearied herself with her useless curiosity.

At length the term of her imprisonment was over, and Sophy was restored
to the society of her family. At first she kept a tolerable guard over
herself. Once she saw her father and sister whispering, and did not,
though she longed much to do it, hold her breath that she might hear
what they were saying. Another time she passed Charles's door when it
was ajar and the little study open, and she had so much self-command
that she passed by without peeping in, and she began to think she was
cured of her faults. But in reality this was far from being the case,
and whenever she recollected Mrs. Arden's mysterious note she felt her
inquisitive propensities as strong as ever. Her eyes and ears were
always on the alert, in hopes of obtaining some clue to the knowledge
she coveted, and if Mrs. Arden's or Mr. McNeal's names were mentioned
she listened with trembling anxiety in the hope of hearing some allusion
to the note.
she should make a public acknowledgment of her fault to Mr. McNeal, and
to ask his pardon.

[Illustration]


money to pay for the new purchases, and on their return home Agnes
begged her mother would directly pay herself from her own purse.

'And, mother,' continued Agnes, 'I think the thimble shall be of silver
instead of gold, for a gold one will cost a great deal of money. And I
never use a gold one, and why should I give Laura one?'

'I see no reason why, certainly,' answered Mrs. Clavering, 'excepting
that it was your own proposal. I should have thought that a silver one
was quite as well, if not better; but I did not like to check your wish
of making a handsome present to your cousin. Let it be silver, if you
please; but take care that you keep money enough to pay for that, and
the other articles which you design putting into the New Year's
present.'

'Oh, I shall have plenty now, mother,' returned Agnes; 'but I think I
could not have afforded the gold thimble.'

And she went to her play-room to look at her shells, put them in order,
and see how many were wanting to complete the number which her cousin
possessed.

It now occurred to her that a box to contain them was indispensable, and
the footman's brother being a carpenter, she desired him to get one made
for her. It was soon completed, and when it came home, and was paid for,
Agnes found that it had cost just the difference between a silver and a
gold thimble. She proceeded to place her shells in order, but the box
was not half full, and while thus occupied a visitor called, who was
accompanied by her young son and a beautiful little white dog, and this
little white dog and his master called off her attention for a while
from her shells.

The little animal was very amusing and very playful. He could perform a
number of little odd tricks, and, amongst others, would patiently wait
while his young master counted ten, and then would spring forwards and
receive the piece of bread or biscuit held out to him. Agnes thought she
never could be tired of playing with such a 'dear little dog,' to use
her own expression, and she expressed her wishes so strongly and so
earnestly that the little dog's master, after whispering to his mother,
told Agnes that if she liked she was very welcome to keep the dog, for
that he was going to school, and nobody at home cared for her but
himself. Mrs. Clavering felt vexed that Agnes had so warmly expressed
her admiration of the dog, but she did not see how she could decline her
acceptance, and by this arrangement Agnes for the remainder of the day
had nothing to wish for, excepting, indeed, it might be that the chapter
of the History of England she read to her mother in the evening had not
been quite so long, and that bedtime had not come before she had had
another game of play with little Chloe.

In the morning the first thing to be thought of was Chloe, and Chloe
occasioned in her mistress so many wandering thoughts when she ought to
have been occupied with her book that Mrs. Clavering was obliged to
threaten the loss of the new favourite before the morning task could be
accomplished. At length Chloe was turned out of the room, but then Chloe
would run downstairs, and into the hall, and back again upstairs, and
scratch at the drawing-room door for admittance, and when once more
admitted, on Agnes's promise to let her lie still quietly under the
sofa, Chloe wished to go out of the room again; and out of the room once
more, but only once, she was allowed to go. Then, on the hall-door being
left open for a minute, Chloe was out in the street, and it was with
considerable difficulty that James, the man-servant, could again catch
her. This suggested the necessity of a collar for Chloe, and a collar,
indeed, seemed indispensable if the dog was to be kept.

'But I am not sure that I shall have money enough to buy one,' said
Agnes, as she begged her mother to examine her purse, and assist her in
c'And have you five shillings to spare?' said Mrs. Clavering.

began to feel very serious at being so frequently reproved and
disgraced. She really thought she must be naughty, or, at least, that
Agnes thought her so; and after her little heart had been some time
swelling with emotion, she at length burst out into tears, saying at the
same time, with great vehemence:

'Indeed, Cousin Agnes, I am not naughty!'

'No, you only pretend to be naughty,' said Agnes. 'There, be a good
child, and go in the corner, and pretend to be naughty once more, and
presently, when you have done crying, I shall come and ask you if you
are good.'

'But, indeed, I am good now!' exclaimed Augusta, resisting Agnes as she
tried to lead her back to the corner. And I don't like to be naughty! I
like to be good!'

'Let me be naughty; it is my turn to be naughty now, Agnes,' said Laura,
stepping forwards and taking Augusta's other hand.

'Oh, but it is not half so much fun for you to be naughty,' said Agnes;
'you are such a great girl. Besides, Augusta pretends to cry so well.'

'I don't pretend to cry, and I will not be naughty any more!' said
Augusta, who was now irritated into a violent pet; and as she struggled
against her cousin, who attempted to draw her to the corner, the poor
child was thrown down, and her head hit against the sharp corner of the
shell-box.

Sw
on her gloves, so anxious was she to be going, and she ran towards the
door.

'But Mrs. Montague is not come yet, Agnes,' said Mrs. Clavering.

'Oh, I forgot,' replied Agnes, returning towards her mother. Then,
telling upon her fingers she went on: 'Blue bag, thimble, needle-book,
scissors, winders.'

'And pincushion,' said Mrs. Clavering.

'Oh yes, pincushion; I had forgotten pincushion. Yes, there must be a
pincushion.'

'Now, could not you make the pincushion yourself, Agnes?' asked Mrs.
Clavering. 'And the needle-case, I should think, too; and Laura would
like them better for your making them.'

'I do not think I should be able to make them well enough, mother,'
replied Agnes; 'and I should not like to give anything clumsy to Laura.
No, I think I shall buy them.'

'Well, do as you please about this,' replied Mrs. Clavering; and Mrs.
Montague's carriage being now heard to rattle down to the door, she gave
her little girl a hasty kiss, and Agnes ran downstairs and was very soon
on her road to the Bazaar.

As they drove through the streets the little Montagues were very eager
in describing a beautiful new stall which had been opened since they had
been to the Bazaar. It was one of French toys and trinkets, and there
were a great many very pretty and very ingenious things exhibiting
there. There were dolls, and workboxes, and wire-dancers, and puzzles of
every description. And so very anxious were all three of the little
girls to see and admire what all the little and great girls, too, of
their acquaintance thought so very well worth seeing and admiring that,
when they had left the carriage and entered the room, Mrs. Montague
could scarcely keep pace with the nimble-footed little party. They paced
round and round the lower room, and were just ascending into the upper,
when the first thought of the blue bag crossed the recollection of
Agnes.

'Oh, my little blue bag!' she said to her young companions; and slipping
behind them, stopped at the stall where she had before seen it
displayed.

It was sold. This was not the fault of Agnes.

Should they make another for the young lady? It would be ready by
to-morrow, and it should be sent home to any place she should appoint.

'Yes--no.'

Agnes was in a great hurry to go upstairs to the French stall, and
Harriet and Eliza were both urging her to make haste.

'There will be prettier bags at the French stall, love, most likely,'
whispered Mrs. Montague; 'and, if not, you could give this order as you
returned downstairs.'

Agnes wanted very little persuasion to despatch her business below, and
the three little girls again quickened their pace towards the upstair
room.

'The blue bag was sold,' said Agnes, after a pause of a few minutes,
during which she had been picking the pins out of her mother's
pincushion and dropping them one by one on the floor.

Mrs. Clavering took the pincushion gently from the hand of her little
girl, and desired her to pick up the pins which she had been so
carelessly scattering.

'And were all the scissors and pincushions and thimbles sold, too?'
continued Mrs. Clavering. 'And would it not have been possible to have
had another bag made, like the one you saw the other day?'

'Yes, mother,' replied Agnes, as she replaced the last pin in the
pincushion; 'the woman _did_ offer to make another, but I had no money
left then.'

'This will never do, Agnes, indeed,' said Mrs. Clavering. 'If you are
allowed to indulge all your wishes in this way while you continue a
child, you will grow up to be a disagreeable and overbearing woman. Did
you never read, "Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye
even so to them"? Come, tell me; try and recollect.' And as Mrs.
Clavering spoke her voice softened, and she laid her cheek on the head
of her little girl, who had seated herself on a stool at her feet. 'Did
you ever read of this?'

'Yes, mother, I have read it in the Bible,' replied Agnes, as she turned
round towards her mother, and laid her head coaxingly on her lap.

'It was one of the directions of our blessed Saviour,' continued Mrs.
Clavering, 'and His directions we ought always to obey. Now, supposing
that your Cousin Laura had determined to give you anything she knew you
were very desirous of having, should you like her to change her mind,
because she fancied something for herself which she could not purchase
without doing so? Should you not think she was unkind in doing so?'

'Yes, mother,' replied Agnes; 'but Laura did not know I was going to
give it her, and therefore she will not think me unkind.'

'No, but you will know that you have been so,' replied Mrs. Clavering;
'and I know that you have been so, and I am very much hurt that you are
so, for, as I have frequently told you, I do not like such little
selfish ways as you too frequently indulge.'

Agnes did not feel comfortable, and she had not half the enjoyment of
her new purchases which she expected to have; and she had very little
pleasure in showing them to her cousins, who were allowed on the next
day, for the first time since their illness, to come and play with her.
The tumbler was not half so droll as he seemed to be before she bought
him. Augusta, however, was delighted with him. She laughed aloud at all
his whimsical changes, and Agnes told her that she might have it if she

[Illustration]




McLOUGHLIN'S ONE-SYL-LA-BLE BOOKS





McLoughlin's Editions of Recitation Books

Something new in the construction of a series of Recitation Books for
young people, edited and arranged by Matilda Blair, from the writings of
some of the most popular authors of prose and verse. Handsomely
illustrated, with frontispieces done in lithography. Cloth, octavo. 160
pp. Artistically stamped in colors. Price 50 cents.


  WEE PIECES FOR WEE SPEAKERS

"'Wee Pieces for Wee Speakers' should be popular with the mothers and
teachers who are called upon to provide 'pieces' for the children to
speak. All ages and tastes are provided for, with a little girls' and a
little boys' section, a special assortment of Christmas selections, and
hundreds of verses for older amateur elocutionists. Some very good
poetry is included."--_The Chicago Record-Herald._



  890 Broadway, N. Y.




THE YOUNG READER'S LIBRARY

This is a series of classics, edited and arranged for our young readers.
Beautifully illustrated throughout, with colored frontispiece done in
lithography. Quarto, cloth, stamped in colors. Price, twenty-five cents.

  King of the Golden River, by John Ruskin.
  Rip Van Winkle, by Washington Irving.
  Robin Hood, by H. W. Dulcken.
  Robinson Crusoe, by Daniel Defoe.
  The Christmas Tree, by Hans Christian Anderson.
  White Cat and Other Stories, by Madame D'Aulnoy.

  Other volumes in preparation
raphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
Title: The Book

Author: Michael Shaara

I


Beauclaire was given his first ship at Sirius. He was called up before
the Commandant in the slow heat of the afternoon, and stood shuffling
with awkward delight upon the shaggy carpet. He was twenty-five years
old, and two months out of the Academy. It was a wonderful day.

The Commandant told Beauclaire to sit down, and sat looking at him for
a long while. The Commandant was an old man with a face of many lines.
He was old, was hot, was tired. He was also very irritated. He had
reached that point of oldness when talking to a young man is an
irritation because they are so bright and certain and don't know
anything and there is nothing you can do about it.

"All right," the Commandant said, "there are a few things I have to
tell you. Do you know where you are going?"

"No, sir," Beauclaire said cheerfully.

"All right," the Commandant said again, "I'll tell you. You are going
to the Hole in Cygnus. You've heard of it, I hope? Good. Then you know
that the Hole is a large dust cloud--estimated diameter, ten
light-years. We have never gone into the Hole, for a number of
reasons. It's too thick for light speeds, it's too big, and Mapping
Command ships are being spread thin. Also, until now, we never thought
there was anything in the Hole worth looking at. So we have never gone
into the Hole. Your ship will be the first."

"Yes, _sir_," Beauclaire said, eyes shining.

"A few weeks ago," the Commandant said, "one of our amateurs had a
lens on the Hole, just looking. He saw a glow. He reported to us; we
checked and saw the same thing. There is a faint light coming out of
the Hole--obviously, a sun, a star inside the cloud, just far enough
in to be almost invisible. God knows how long it's been there, but we
do know that there's never been a record of a light in the Hole.
Apparently this star orbited in some time ago, and is now on its way
out. It is just approaching the edge of the cloud. Do you follow me?"

"Yes, sir," Beauclaire said.

"Your job is this: You will investigate that sun for livable planets
and alien life. If you find anything--which is highly unlikely--you
are to decipher the language and come right back. A Psych team will go
out and determine the effects of a starless sky upon the alien
culture--obviously, these people will never have seen the stars."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Commandant leaned forward, intent now for the first time.

"Now, this is an important job. There were no other linguists
available, so we passed over a lot of good men to pick you. Make no
mistake about your qualifications. You are nothing spectacular. But
the ship will be yours from now on, permanently. Have you got that?"

The young man nodded, grinning from ear to ear.

"There is something else," the Commandant said, and abruptly he
paused.

He gazed silently at Beauclaire--at the crisp gray uniform, the
baby-slick cheek--and he thought fleetingly and bitterly of the Hole
in Cygnus which he, an old man, would never see. Then he told himself
sternly to leave off self-pity. The important thing was coming up, and
he would have to say it well.

"Listen," he said. The tone of his voice was very strong and
Beauclaire blinked. "You are replacing one of our oldest men. One of
our best men. His name is Billy Wyatt. He--he has been with us a long
time." The Commandant paused again, his fingers toying with the
blotter on his desk. "They have told you a lot of stuff at the
Academy, which is all very important. But I want you to understand
something else: This Mapping Command is a weary business--few men last
for any length of time, and those that do aren't much good in the end.
You know that. Well, I want you to be very careful when you talk to
Billy Wyatt; and I want you to listen to him, because he's been around
longer than anybody. We're relieving him, yes, because he is breaking
down. He's no good for us any more; he has no more nerve. He's lost
the feeling a man has to have to do his job right."

The Commandant got up slowly and walked around in front of Beauclaire,
looking into his eyes.

"When you relieve Wyatt, treat him with respect. He's been farther and
seen more than any man you will ever meet. I want no cracks and no
pity for that man. Because, listen, boy, sooner or later the same
thing will happen to you. Why? Because it's too big--" the Commandant
gestured helplessly with spread hands--"it's all just too damn big.
Space is never so big that it can't get bigger. If you fly long
enough, it will finally get too big to make any sense, and you'll
start thinking. You'll start thinking that it doesn't make sense. On
that day, we'll bring you back and put you into an office somewhere.
If we leave you alone, you lose ships and get good men killed--there's
nothing we can do when space gets too big. That is what happened to
Wyatt. That is what will happen, eventually, to you. Do you
understand?"

The young man nodded uncertainly.

"And that," the Commandant said sadly, "is the lesson for today. Take
your ship. Wyatt will go with you on this one trip, to break you in.
Pay attention to what he has to say--it will mean something. There's
one other crewman, a man named Cooper. You'll be flying with him now.
Keep your ears open and your mouth shut, except for questions. And
don't take any chances. That's all."

Beauclaire saluted and rose to go.

"When you see Wyatt," the Commandant said, "tell him I won't be able
to make it down before you leave. Too busy. Got papers to sign. Got
more damn papers than the chief has ulcers."

The young man waited.

"That, God help you, is all," said the Commandant.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wyatt saw the letter when the young man was still a long way off. The
white caught his eye, and he watched idly for a moment. And then he
saw the fresh green gear on the man's back and the look on his face as
he came up the ladder, and Wyatt stopped breathing.

He stood for a moment blinking in the sun. _Me?_ he thought ... _me?_

Beauclaire reached the platform and threw down his gear, thinking that
this was one hell of a way to begin a career.

Wy
Wyatt sat down. "Where you been?"

"In the port. Been drinkin' in the goddam port. Hot!"

"Bring back any?"

Coop waved an arm floppily in no particular direction. "Look around."

The flasks lay in a heap by the door. Wyatt took one and sat down
again. The room was warm and green and silent. The two men had been
together long enough to be able to sit without speaking, and in the
green glow they waited, thinking. The first pull Wyatt took was long
and numbing; he closed his eyes.

Coop did not move at all. Not even his toes. When Wyatt had begun to
think he was asleep, he said suddenly:

"Heard about the replacement."

Wyatt looked at him.

"Found out this afternoon," Coop said, "from the goddam Commandant."

Wyatt closed his eyes again.

"Where you goin'?" Coop asked.

Wyatt shrugged. "Plush job."

"You got any plans?"

Wyatt shook his head.

Coop swore moodily. "Never let you alone," he muttered. "Miserable
bastards." He rose up suddenly in the chair, pointing a long
matchstick finger into Wyatt's face. "Listen, Billy," he said with
determination, "you was a good man, you know that? You was one hell of
a good goddam man."

Wyatt took another long pull and nodded, smiling.

"You said it," he said.

"I sailed with some good men, some _good_ men," Coop insisted,
stabbing shakily but emphatically with his finger, "but you don't take
nothin' from nobody."

[Illustration]

"Here's to me, I'm true blue," Wyatt grinned.

       *       *       *       *       *

Coop sank back in the chair, satisfied. "I just wanted you should
know. You been a good man."

"Betcher sweet life," Wyatt said.

"So they throw you out. _Me_ they keep. _You_ they throw out. They got
no brains."

Wyatt lay back, letting the liquor take hold, receding without pain
into a quiet world. The ship was good to feel around him, dark and
throbbing like a living womb. _Just like a womb_, he thought. _It's a
lot like a womb._

"Listen," Coop said thickly, rising from his chair. "I think I'll quit
this racket. What the hell I wanna stay in this racket for?"

Wyatt looked up, startled. When Coop was drunk, he was never a little
drunk. He was always far gone, and he could be very mean. Wyatt saw
now that he was down deep and sinking; that the replacement was a big
thing to him, bigger than Wyatt had expected. In this team, Wyatt had
been the leader, and it had seldom occurred to him that Coop really
needed him. He had never really thought about it. But now he let
himself realize that, alone, Coop could be very bad. Unless this new
man was worth anything and learned quickly, Coop would very likely get
himself killed.

Now, more than ever, this replacement thing was ridiculous; but for
Coop's sake, Wyatt said quickly:

"Drop that, man. You'll be on this ship in the boneyard. You even look
like this ship--you got a bright red bow."

When the tall man was dark and silent, Wyatt said gently, "Coop. Easy.
We leave at midnight. Want me to take her up?"

"Naw." Coop turned away abruptly, shaking his head. "T'hell with you.
Go die." He sank back deeply in the seat, his gaunt face reflecting
her agitation.

"Why, it's Mr. Monteith, as sure as I live," said Edna's father.

"Yes, Mr. Winters," said Mr. Monteith, "I found a stray lamb of yours
on the highway, and brought it home."

"May God reward you," and Mr. Winters clasped his hand warmly. "I
have been very anxious. I did not see what was to become of her if
she was on her way in this terrible storm. How providential that you
happened to be going her way."

Mr. Monteith winced a little at this.

"You will stay with us to-night, of course," Mr. Winters said.

"Oh, no, indeed! Thank you! I must get back before dark. Will rest a
few minutes, though."

The Storm King was out in full force that day, for during those few
minutes huge banks piled themselves against windows and doors, and
the wind shrieked and moaned like a demon, shaking the house to its
foundations.

"Now," said Mr. Winters as his guest rose to go, "it is madness for
you to think of going home tonight, and I must insist that you stay.
I am disabled just now, or I would harness old Prince and get you
through."

Here Edna came in with her pleading eyes and, "Do stay; I know it is
not safe for you to go."

Motherly Mrs. Winters entreated also. How could he resist such
urgency, especially when it exactly fitted in with what he desired
above all things to do. He yielded, and was soon comfortably
established in the large old rocker by the fire. And now he enjoyed
the pleasure of a new experience. The stereotyped fashionable house
he knew all about, but this old house that looked small, and yet
stretched itself out into many cosy rooms; it was quaint, it was
unique, and so was the little household. It was like stepping into a
book, and that a book of poems. What was the charm of that low-browed
room he sat in? Could it be the broad fireplace, wherein blazed and
snapped a veritable back-log? Mr. Winters had stoves to warm the
house, but he insisted on keeping this fire to look at.

When they all gathered about the tea-table, his critical eye noted
many little points that a less refined man would not have thought of.
The fine white table-linen, delicate old-fashioned china, a piece or
two of highly polished silver, and the table not vulgarly loaded with
too great variety, yet everything delicious and abundant. Mr. and
Mrs. Winters, too, though unpretending, were persons of refinement
and intelligence. He was puzzled to understand how a young girl,
reared in so much seclusion, should possess such grace and culture as
did Edna. After tea, when she played and sang, his mystification
increased, for the bird-like voice and delicate touch were superior
to much that he heard among his city friends. It came out in the
course of conversation, however, that Edna had spent the last six
years in one of the finest schools in Boston--an inmate of her aunt's
family; and now she had come back to them to gladden the eyes of
those two, who almost set her up as an idol; come back, not spoiled,
taking up her daily little homely duties again with real zest.

Mr. Monteith found Mr. Winters most congenial company. He had read
extensively, and was keen in argument, throwing in a bit of poetry or
a witty story, as the case required. Edna brought her crotcheting and
made herself into a picture in one corner of the fireplace, her
changing, speaking face and piquant remarks lending interest to the
dullest subject.


A few days after Christmas the stage-driver left at the door a small
box marked "Samuel Winters." The old gentleman put on his glasses and
opened it with much curiosity. Behold, there lay a lovely bouquet of
roses, carnations, and violets. He lifted it with care, and a card
marked "Hugh Monteith" fell from it. "That is odd," he said, with a
roguish look at Edna, "to send these things to me; they are pretty,
though, I declare," and he buried his face in a fragrant rose, then
involuntarily hummed--
not tell you yet," Vida said, half shyly, "but my money is not mine
any more. I gave it all to the dear Lord, I would like to build a
pretty church with some of it, and here we will stay and work, you
and I together. I can help you now, Thane--a little. Don't you like
my plan?" she said, anxiously, when he did not speak.

"My darling, you have made me so happy that I could not speak," he
said, after a little. "I wish it above all things--to go on with my
work here, and a new church is so much needed. How strange that you
should be willing to stay, and that we can work together! Oh, Vida! I
prayed--with faith, I thought--but I never dreamed of an hour like
this; surely 'It has not entered into our hearts to conceive the
things which God has prepared for them that love Him--in this life.'"

There was another sensation in an audience when the pastor of the log
church brought in his wife, for naught so fair and sweet had ever
gladdened their rustic eyes before. The singing that day was mostly
solo, or at least, duets. Her pure, birdlike voice filled the church,
and what could they do but listen, wondering meanwhile whether it
might not be a lark, or an angel come down for a season.

When a teeming, busy town covered the prairie, and the heel of
agriculture and commerce crushed out the wild flowers, the log church
was preserved as a memorial, while the spire of the handsome new one
was eagerly pointed out, its story treasured and handed down to
children's children.

These two spent their happy lives ministering to this simple people,
their hearts and hands so filled with work that they had no time to
sigh for the privileges of more cultivated surroundings. The pastor's
wife was the warm friend and sympathizer of the common people, and
her name was singularly appropriate--Vida--well-beloved.




HOW A WOMAN WAS CONVERTED TO MISSIONS.


The poor women and girls are so taken up with cleaning their houses
and dishes, and preparing their daily meals, that they will not give
themselves up to thinking in the least. So writes Miss Blunt
concerning the women of India. It was something of the same sort that
prevented Mrs. John Williams from giving herself up to thinking, or
from thinking about anything but her own private affairs. Not that
Mrs. Williams gave herself up to scrubbing doors and windows and
cleaning pots and pans with her own hands, but she was "taken up" all
the same. When Christ was a babe on earth there was no room for him
in the inn, so to-day many a heart is so full that Christ and his
cause are turned out. If a heart is full how can it hold more? Do not
suppose that there was no thinking done by Mrs. Williams. She
superintended all her work and did much of her own sewing; as her
family was not small and her income not large, and she kept but one
servant, it took a vast deal of thinking and worrying to keep the
Williams family up to the standard, which was one not of neatness and
comfort simply, but that she should live in the same style as those
of her friends whose incomes were possibly twice as large as her own,
that her children's clothes should be just as fine and as fashionably
made as theirs, that she herself should be able to make as good an
appearance as the best when she went into society, that her parlour
should be furnished as far as in her lay, with all the elegance and
taste that the law of the fashionable world required. This was the
grand aim to which she bent all her energies.

Mrs. Williams was a member in good and regular standing of an
orthodox church. She regularly occupied her pew in the sanctuary, and
when she had no other engagement, attended the weekly prayer-meeting,
but the most persistent and zealous member of the "Ladies' Foreign
Missionary Society" had never succeeded in inducing her to attend
their monthly meetings, but just once. She took pains to explain it
carefully to her conscience that she believed in Foreign Missions,
but that didn't prove that it was necessary for her to spend a whole
afternoon each month hearing dry reports and "papers" about countries
with outlandish names. What good did that do anyway? It was
mysterious--how ladies could do justice to their families and spend
so much time out. As for herself she could scarcely keep up with her
calls. But then! they neglected their families, of course they did;
women that were always on a committee for something or other, and
running off here and there to all kinds of meetings. Very likely,
too, it just suited some women to get up on a platform before an
audience, and read a "paper" or "report." It was just a little
leaning to Woman's Rights. She believed in a woman keeping in her own
sphere, and for her part she craved no such notoriety. She had always
noticed, too, that the women who gave themselves up to those things
seemed to lose all regard for their appearance. Now it really was a
duty one owed to their friends, to dress well, and some of those
missionary women were wearing their last year's bonnets; and dresses
of the styles of three or four years back--perfect frights!

She did not see the need of women having a society by themselves
either. Probably they raised just as much money before the ladies got
to making such a fuss about it, it all came out of their husband's
pockets anyway. Her husband always had contributed to Foreign
Missions, and always would probably (it's true he did, a dollar a
year!) and was not that just as well as for her to be bothering her
head about it?

"There!" said Mrs. Williams, one bright afternoon in April, as she
glanced  from  her window. "There comes that Mrs. Brown. I know what
she's after. She wants me to go to that stupid missionary meeting. I
suppose this is the afternoon for it. I promised her I would go again
some time--sorry I did too. That's just as much sense as some persons
have; think that one can drop everything and go to a missionary
meeting--in the spring of the year, too, when there is so much sewing
to be done;" and she hastily instructed Bridget to tell Mrs. Brown
that she was "engaged." So Mrs. Brown went on her way to the meeting,
and sat in heavenly places, and had her heart stirred with new love
and zeal, while Mrs. Williams sat at home, and worked diligently on a
dress for her young daughter, an elaborate dress of frills, and lace,
and embroidery, and many weary stitches. At the close of the day she
congratulated herself that she had accomplished a fine afternoon's
work.
no, it was to be had, and the nice old lady who owned it wanted to
rent it, and take up her abode with her daughter, was just as much
delighted as Faith. So eager and enthusiastic a tenant was not found
every day. The four pretty rooms--parlours, bedroom, dining-room, and
kitchen--exactly suited;  a bargain was soon concluded, and Faith on
a homeward train, congratulating herself on the success of a part of
her plan.


http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
